Add lifecycle docs (#2772)
owncloud/docs: modules/admin_manual/pages/enterprise/file_management/files_lifecycle.adoc

= File Lifecycle Management
:toc: right

> 

Reviewer: Please add a section (as we have in other longer pages):

== Introduction

Author: @pmaier1

Manage the lifecycle of files within ownCloud to keep your working structure clean, organized and up to date. Choose an archiving and expiration policy that suits your workflow and select an appropriate archive destination to store your old files. Policies can be configured to include and exclude certain files, users
and groups from the archiving actions. 

== Installation & Configuration

> === Upload Time Tracking

Reviewer: This is confusing.
First you talk about `File Lifecycle Management` then about `Upload Time Tracking`. Please stay consistant.
Second, starting with 10.5 you have all Enterprise Apps included in the tar file, so nothing needs to be uploaded. Therefore consider renaming the section title `== Installation & Configuration`.

Author: ?? Lifecycle Management is about Upload Time Tracking

Reviewer: If needed have a „Installation“ section...
Then, Upload Time Tracking is not an app. Therefore nothing to install.
You may start with `== Prerequisites` and describe what is necessary to run this app successfully, like enable it (or as I highlighted below that Impersonate may be necessary to be enabled too).
Then you add a section like `==Configuration` to describe config topics ect.
Remember that readers have to follow your thoughts and a clear path.

Author: I am not sure if Lifecycle is part of the Complete Tarball. I would expect a market:install.

Please feel free to re structure this PR.

This is the Output from DEV to give a good start for documentation.

> The first part of file lifecycle management begins with knowing when files first enter ownCloud. To start tracking this the app must be enabled. This will store an `upload-time` with each file, which is the server time at which it first appeared on the ownCloud server. Only files are tracked, not folders since these are never archived, only the files within them.

Reviewer: `Only files are tracked, not folders since these are never archived, only the files within them.` -->
`Only files in folders are tracked. Folders are never archived and therefore not tracked.`

Reviewer 2: What about files without folders? Are they not tracked ? :)

> If installing this app on a system with existing data, the `lifecycle:set-upload-time` command can be used to pre-set a specific upload time to all existing files, so they may also be included in the archiving workflow. Files without an `upload-time` will not be considered for archive.

Reviewer: installing - enabling ??

Author: Files without an upload time would be all files on a "normal" ownCloud instance without Lifecycle enabled or all files before lifecycle was enabled. This command is brought in to bulk set them.

Example: `occ lifecycle:set-upload-time 2019-11-01`

=== Policy Configuration

The Lifecycle app uses policies to determine which files to archive and when, as 

> well as when to expire the files from archive, if at all. Hard and Soft policies 

Reviewer: `as well as when to expire` --> `as well when to expire`

are available, depending on the use case requirements.

By default, the SoftPolicy is used. To configure the policy, use the `occ` command:

`occ config:app:set files_lifecycle policy --value='hard'`

> Three options are available for controlling the policies, all set via `occ config:app:set` under the `files_lifecycle` app:

Reviewer: under the `files_lifecycle` app --> for the `files_lifecycle` app

> - `archive_period` int - The number of days after upload, or restore, that the file will be archived

Reviewer: please make this list a table for better readbility

- `expire_period` int - The number of days after archive which the file will be  permanently deleted
- `excluded_groups` string, comma separated group ids - Groups who are exempt from lifecycle policy.

> Example: `occ config:app:set files_lifecycle archive_period --value='90'`

Reviewer: ```
Example:
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle archive_period --value='90'
----
```

use this for all occ commands in this document

Reviewer 2: why?

Reviewer: Because there is a antora definition in the backend replacing the content correctly and making it look everywhere the same.
Wondering why you ask, you should know about the use of these definitions ??

==== Soft Policy
  

> The Soft policy is for use cases where the main working directory  should be reserved for actively used files, and users are encouraged to archive older data. Admins are also still able to impersonate users and restore files for them to assist where necessary.

Reviewer: `working directory  should` --> `working directory should`
(double blank used between directory and should)

==== Hard Policy

The Hard policy is designed to enforce strict controls on users data, forcing archive after a set time, and requiring escalated permissions in order to restore.

[NOTE]
====

> With Hard Policy, users are not permitted to restore their own files. Impersonators are allowed to restore files of the users they are impersonating. This allows managers to restore specific files or folders for users on request.

Reviewer: `not permitted to restore their own files` --> `not permitted to restore files on their own`

====

==== Archive Destination

By default, archived files are also stored within the ownCloud data directory, 
but outside the users files directories so that they are not accessible using the 

> web ui and sync clients. Normal files are stored in `/datadir/$userid/files`, whilst

Reviewer: `/datadir/$userid/` --> `/<datadir>/$userid/`

`occ lifecycle:expire` will permanently delete files from the archive that have
met the appropriate policy rules.

==== Restoring Files

Admins may restore users files manually using the command `occ lifecycle:restore`.
If a user would like the folder `/work/projects/project1` restored, the admin can trigger the following command:

`occ lifecycle:restore /userid/archive/files/work/projects/project1`

If you would like to stop using Lifecycle Management and restore all files from  all archives back to their owners' files directories, you can use the `restore-all`  command:

`occ lifecycle:restore-all` 

which will restore all files from all users, and report on the progress as it does so.

==== Audit Events

During archive, restore and expiry, appropriate Audit events are emitted. This requires `admin_audit` v2.0.0 minimum.

==== Notes about Archived Files

 - Shares pointing to archived files will not be found but will resume upon restore
 - Users' archives are not currently transferred with `occ transfer-ownership`
 - Files within a users trashbin are not archived, use trashbin deletion policies
 - Archived files count towards the user's quota

== Disable the UI

> It could be desired to disable the whole UI for this app. This can be done by setting the following configuration value.

Reviewer: Explain a reason to help understanding

To enable the UI again, this config value needs to be removed.

`occ config:app:delete files_lifecycle disable_ui`

== Usage

=== For Users

==== Archive Process

To see when and if files are scheduled for archive, a user may select a file within the files app, and in the info sidebar, they can see the remaining days until it will be automatically archived. If the file is waiting for the background job to move it to the archive, it will show 'Scheduled for archive!'.

Depending on the policy configuration, users may be able to archive their own files using a file action in the files app.

Whilst a file is in the archive, it is not readable with the sync client or web UI, but can be located using the Archive Browser. Existing metadata including shares, comments and tags are preserved, but will not be available. 

==== Browsing the Archive

Users can browse the archive in a similar fashion to the trashbin, using the 'Archived Files' file list available on the bottom left of the files app. Folder structures are recreated showing the paths that were present at the time the file was archived.

image:enterprise/file_management/lifecycle-1.png[The Archive Browser]

==== Restoring Files

> Depending on the policy configuration, users may be able to restore files in the Archive Browser by clicking the 'Restore' action on the file or folder row. Specific policies may require different permissions to access this option, or permanently disable it. 

Reviewer: Put a link to soft/hard policy above.

= File Lifecycle Management
:toc: right

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:impersonate_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/impersonate
```

> == Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:activity_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/activity
:auditing_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/admin_audit

== Introduction
```

The File Lifecycle Management extension allows service providers to manage the lifecycle of files within ownCloud to

- keep storage usage under control by limiting the time users can work with files before they are cleaned up automatically
- comply with regulations (like GDPR or company policies) by imposing automated retention and deletion policies for files that contain e.g., personal data and may only be stored in the company for a certain period of time.

To impose a workflow of Use => Archive => Delete, the extension equips ownCloud with a dedicated archive and allows administrators to define rules for automated archiving (days passed since upload) and subsequent deletion of files (days passed since archiving). Only files are archived as folders do not consume storage space and existing folder structures should be kept available. The archiving and deletion processes are controlled by background jobs.

Depending on the desired level of enforcement, the extension provides two policies to control the restoration of files from the archive if they are still needed:

> - Soft policy: Users can restore files in self-service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- xref:soft_policy[Soft policy]: Users can restore files in self-service
```

> - Hard policy: Only administrators or group administrators can restore files on request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- xref:hard_policy[Hard policy]: Only administrators or group administrators can restore files on request
```

> Users can view the lifecycle status for a file and see when the file is scheduled for archiving or deletion. All lifecycle events of a file are displayed transparently. They can be tracked for individual files as well as for a whole user account using the https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/activity[Activity] stream. To stay informed, users can also receive regular Activity summaries by e-mail. For auditing purposes the extension integrates with the https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/admin_audit[Auditing] app to provide all events of interest in the logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can view the lifecycle status for a file and see when the file is scheduled for archiving or deletion. All lifecycle events of a file are displayed transparently. They can be tracked for individual files as well as for a whole user account using the {activity_app}[Activity] stream. To stay informed, users can also receive regular Activity summaries by e-mail. For auditing purposes the extension integrates with the {auditing_app}[Auditing] app to provide all events of interest in the logs.
```

== Setup & Configuration

=== Setting Upload Times for Existing Files

File Lifecycle Management uses the _upload time_ of files (server time at which it first appeared on the ownCloud server) to determine when to archive them. As ownCloud Server generally does not store this metadata, the File Lifecycle Management extension takes care of this when it is enabled.

> When File Lifecycle Management is set up on an existing ownCloud installation, you therefore have to set an _upload time_ for all files that existed before the extension has been enabled to allow the archiving policies doing their job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When File Lifecycle Management is set up on an existing ownCloud installation, you therefore have to set an _upload time_ for all files that existed before the extension has been enabled to allow the archiving policies to do their job.
```

To set an upload time for all files that do not yet have one, you can use the `lifecycle:set-upload-time` _occ_ command. 

TIP: Files without an _upload time_ will not be considered for archiving.
TIP: You only have to conduct this process once when setting up File Lifecycle Management on an installation with existing files. Files added after enabling File Lifecycle Management will be tracked automatically.

Example to set missing upload time values to November, 1st 2019: 

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} lifecycle:set-upload-time 2019-11-01
----

TIP: The extension only considers files. Folder structures are kept available.

=== Policy Configuration
==== Overview

File Lifecycle Management uses policies to determine which files to archive and when, as well as when to expire the files from archive. In addition, a soft and a hard policy are available to control whether users can restore archived files in self-service or not.

Three options are available for controlling the archiving and expiration policies, all set via the `config:app:set` _occ_ command under the `files_lifecycle` app:

> - `archive_period` - The number of days passed after upload (or restore) for that files will be archived

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `archive_period` - The number of days passed after upload (or restore) that files will be archived
```

> - `expire_period` - The number of days passed after archiving for that files will be permanently deleted

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `expire_period` - The number of days passed after archiving that files will be permanently deleted
```

> - `excluded_groups` - Allows to define groups of users that are exempt from the Lifecycle policies (comma-separated group ids)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `excluded_groups` - Allows defining groups of users that are exempt from the Lifecycle policies (comma-separated group ids)
```

Example to set the time passed since upload (or restore) for archiving files to 90 days:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle archive_period --value='90'
----

To query existing values use this example command:
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:get files_lifecycle archive_period
----

==== Restoration Policies for Users

===== Soft Policy
  
The _soft policy_ aims at use cases where users should be allowed to restore files from the archive in self-service if they are still needed. It imposes a soft archiving enforcement but on the other hand relieves IT departments when archived files need to be restored.
The _soft policy_ is used by default. To switch from the hard policy to the soft policy, use this _occ_ command:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle policy --value='soft'
----

===== Hard Policy

> The _hard policy_ is designed to enforce strict controls on user data, forcing archiving after the defined time and requiring escalated permissions in order to restore. For the case that archived data is still needed, users need to get in contact with a privileged manager and request the restoration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The _hard policy_ is designed to enforce strict controls on user data, forcing archiving after the defined time and requiring escalated permissions in order to restore. If the archived data is still needed, users need to get in contact with a privileged manager and request the restoration.
```

> TIP: When the _hard policy_ is in place only administrators (or also group administrators, depending the configuration) are able to restore files from the archive by impersonating the respective users. The https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/impersonate[Impersonate app] has to be installed and enabled as a prerequisite. Apart from that, system administrators can also use _occ_ commands to restore data from the archive (see section 'Restoring Files').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: When the _hard policy_ is in place only administrators (or also group administrators, depending the configuration) are able to restore files from the archive by impersonating the respective users. The {impersonate_app}[Impersonate app] has to be installed and enabled as a prerequisite. Apart from that, system administrators can also use _occ_ commands to restore data from the archive (see section xref:restoring_files[Restoring Files]).
```

To put the _hard policy_ in place, use this _occ_ command:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle policy --value='hard'
----

==== Archive Location

By default, archived files are stored within the ownCloud data directory, but outside the users files directories so that they are not accessible using the Web UI and other clients. User files are stored in `/<datadir>/$userid/files`, whilst archived files are stored in `/<datadir>/$userid/archive/files/`.

=== Archive and Expiration Background Jobs

To put File Lifecycle Management into actual operation, there are two _occ_ commands for archiving files and for permanently deleting them from the archive. Scanning the database for files that are due for archiving or expiration, given the chosen policies, can take some time. For this reason, these jobs are delegated to specific _occ_ commands which should be executed using CRON on a daily schedule.

> ==== 1) Archiving Background Job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Archiving Background Job
```
As these are already sections, this does not look good to numerate them

To move files scheduled for archiving (days since upload/restore > `archive_time`) into the archive, execute the following _occ_ command:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} lifecycle:archive
----

TIP: There is a dry-run mode (append `-d`) that simulates the execution of this command to allow checking the configuration before putting the actual process in place.

> ==== 2) Archive Expiration Background Job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Archive Expiration Background Job
```

To permanently delete files from the archive that have met the policy rules (days since archiving > `expire_period`), execute the following _occ_ command:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} lifecycle:expire
----

TIP: There is a dry-run mode (append `-d`) that simulates the execution of this command to allow checking the configuration before putting the actual process in place.

=== Restoring Files

> For the case that archived files are still needed, users can restore them in self-service (_soft policy_) or have to request the restoration via privileged managers (_hard policy_).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If archived files are still needed, users can restore them in self-service (_soft policy_) or have to request the restoration via privileged managers (_hard policy_).
```

----

==== Restoring All Files from All Archives
File Lifecycle Management provides a way to restore all files from all archives back to their owners' file directories. To do this, system administrators can use the `restore-all` _occ_ command:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} lifecycle:restore-all
----

The command will restore all files from all users and report on the progress.

TIP: There is a dry-run mode (append `-d`) that simulates the execution of this command to allow checking the configuration before putting the actual process in place.

=== Enabling/Disabling the User Interface Components

In some scenarios it can be desired to disable the whole user interface for this app. This can be done by setting the following configuration value:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle disable_ui --value='yes'
----

To enable the user interface components again, this config value needs to be removed:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:delete files_lifecycle disable_ui
----

== Audit Events

> During archiving, restoring and expiration, Audit events are emitted. Logging those to the audit.log requires the minimum version 2.0.0 of the https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/admin_audit[Auditing] app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During archiving, restoring and expiration, Audit events are emitted. Logging those to the audit.log requires the minimum version 2.0.0 of the {auditing_app}[Auditing] app.
```

= File Lifecycle Management
:toc: right
:impersonate_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/impersonate
:activity_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/activity
:auditing_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/admin_audit

> :admin_audit_app: https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/admin_audit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Commit before edit-fix double present :smile:

== Setup & Configuration

=== Setting upload times for existing files

File Lifecycle Management uses the _upload time_ of files (server time at which it first appeared on the ownCloud server) to determine when to archive them. As ownCloud Server generally does not store this metadata, the File Lifecycle Management extension takes care of this when it is enabled.

When File Lifecycle Management is set up on an existing ownCloud installation, you therefore have to set an _upload time_ for all files that existed before the extension has been enabled to allow the archiving policies doing their job.
To set an upload time for all files that do not yet have one, you can use the `lifecycle:set-upload-time` _occ_ command. Files without an _upload time_ will not be considered for archiving.

> Example: `occ lifecycle:set-upload-time 2019-11-01`

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment below

The _soft policy_ is used by default. To switch from the hard policy to the soft policy, use this _occ_ command:

`occ config:app:set files_lifecycle policy --value='soft'`

===== Hard Policy

The hard policy is designed to enforce strict controls on user data, forcing archiving after the defined time and requiring escalated permissions in order to restore. For the case that archived data is still needed, users need to get in contact with a privileged manager and request the restoration.

TIP: When the _hard policy_ is in place only administrators (or also group administrators, depending the configuration) are able to restore files from the archive by impersonating the respective users. The https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/impersonate[Impersonate app] has to be installed and enabled as a prerequisite. Apart from that, system administrators can also use _occ_ commands to restore data from the archive (see section 'Restoring Files').

To put the _hard policy_ in place, use this _occ_ command:

> `occ config:app:set files_lifecycle policy --value='hard'`

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment above

==== Archive Location

By default, archived files are stored within the ownCloud data directory, but outside the users files directories so that they are not accessible using the web ui and sync clients. Normal files are stored in `/datadir/$userid/files`, whilst archived files are stored in `/datadir/$userid/archive/files/`.

=== Archive and Expiration Background Jobs

Scanning the database for files that are due for archiving or expiration, given the chosen policies, can take some time. For this reason, these jobs are delegated to specific _occ_ commands which should be executed using CRON on a daily schedule.

**1) Archiving background job**
To move files scheduled for archiving (days since upload/restore > `archive_time`) into the archive, execute the following _occ_ command:

> `occ lifecycle:archive`

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment above

TIP: There is a dry-run mode (append `-d`) that simulates the execution of this command to allow checking the configuration before putting the actual process in place.

**2) Archive expiration background job**
To permanently delete files from the archive that have met the policy rules (days since archiving > `expire_period`), execute the following _occ_ command:

> `occ lifecycle:expire` 

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment above

TIP: There is a dry-run mode (append `-d`) that simulates the execution of this command to allow checking the configuration before putting the actual process in place.

=== Restoring Files

For the case that archived files are still needed, users can restore them in self-service (_soft policy_) or have to request the restoration via privileged managers (_hard policy_).

TIP: When files have been restored, they can again be used for the same amount of time as they were initially available.

Apart from that, system administrators can restore files from the archive using the _occ_ command `lifecycle:restore`:

**Restoration by path**
When a user `alice` requests to restore all files, e.g., in the folder `/work/projects/project1`, a system administrator can execute the following command:

> `occ lifecycle:restore /alice/archive/files/work/projects/project1`

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment above

**Restoring all files from all archives**
File Lifecycle Management provides a way to restore all files from all archives back to their owners' file directories. To do this, system administrators can use the `restore-all` _occ_ command:

> `occ lifecycle:restore-all` 

Reviewer: pls see the `{occ-command-example-prefix}` comment above

- `expire_period` - The number of days passed after archiving for that files will be permanently deleted
- `excluded_groups` - Allows to define groups of users that are exempt from the Lifecycle policies (comma-separated group ids)

Example to set the time passed since upload (or restore) for archiving files to 90 days:

[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:set files_lifecycle archive_period --value='90'

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----

To query existing values use this example command:
[source,console,subs="attributes+"]
----
{occ-command-example-prefix} config:app:get files_lifecycle archive_period
----
```

This should help to understand without digging, how to retrieve existing values
